Clouds of Offerings to Delight the Gentle Protector: How to Practice the Profound Sādhana of The Praise to Noble Mañjuśrī Namo guru Mañjughoṣāya! Those intelligent ones who wish to bring to perfection stainless wisdom, the very root of all qualities of the higher realms and of ultimate happiness, should practice the sādhana based on The Praise to Mañjuśrī: Glorious Wisdom's Excellent Qualities, composed by the accomplished master Vajraśāstra. Start by receiving authorization from an authentic teacher who is a holder of the lineage, and then, giving rise to intense renunciation and great compassion, undertake the progressive stages of this practice. The sādhana is divided into three parts: preliminaries, main practice, and conclusion. First, take refuge and generate the mind of enlightenment: I and all beings, until we reach enlightenment, will follow the lama and the Three Jewels as our refuge. In order to attain perfect buddhahood for the sake of others, I will practice the sādhana of The Praise to Mañjuśrī. By this means, may sentient beings have happiness and the causes of happiness and be free from suffering and the causes of suffering. May they never separate from the happiness that is free from all suffering, and may they abide in the state of great equanimity. Recite three times. The Main Practice: Visualization and Recitation OṂ SVABHĀVA ŚUDDHĀḤ SARVADHARMĀḤ SVABHĀVA ŚUDDHO 'HAṂ All phenomena are beyond the constructions of self, aggregates, and the conceptual mind. From the state of absorption, the unceasing dependent arising of appearances manifests as a magical display, At my three centers are the syllables OṂ ĀḤ HŪṂ, and in the middle of my heart, upon a moon disc, is the syllable DHĪḤ. From these, rays of light stream forth, inviting the wisdom deity, the youthful Mañjuśrī. He appears in the sky in front as a sixteen-year-old youth, joyfully seated upon a lotus and moon disc. Adorned with the major and minor marks, resplendent and supremely majestic, his skin is the color of saffron. His gleaming black hair is gathered in five bunches and his ears are beautified with bouquets of blue utpala flowers. In his right hand he wields the sword of wisdom, and in his left he holds a volume of the Prajñāpāramitā. Adorned with precious gems and multicolored silk raiments, he is seated in the vajra posture. His three centers are marked with the three syllables, and upon a moon disc in the center of his heart, an orange syllable DHĪḤ blazes with light. It emanates light rays, inviting the deities who empower Mañjuśrī with the nectar of primordial wisdom. As it fills his body, all obscurations are purified, and he is crowned by Akṣobhya. Through the power of praising Mañjuśrī and praying with devotion, The words of The Praise and mantra garlands stream forth continuously from the syllable in his heart. Like the brilliant rays of the morning sun, they dissolve into my heart, Dispelling all the darkness of ignorance with the light of his knowledge, love, and power. This causes the lotus of my awareness and love to blossom, and I attain the level of Mañjuśrī, the gentle protector. Visualizing in this way, recite The Praise to Mañjuśrī three times: You, whose intelligence is pure and brilliant like the sun, freed from the clouds of the two obscuring veils, Hold at your heart a volume of the Prajñāpāramitā, for you see the nature of everything as it is. All those who are caught in the prison of existence, clouded by the darkness of ignorance and afflicted with suffering, You love each one as an only child. Your voice is mellifluous with the sixty qualities. With a clap of thunder like the roar of a dragon, you wake us from the slumber of our conflicting emotions and free us from the chains of karma. Dispelling the darkness of ignorance, your sword cuts cleanly through the root of all suffering. Pure from the beginning, with the ten bhūmis traversed and all qualities perfected, the foremost heir of the conquerors, Adorned with the hundred and twelve signs of buddhahood-to you, who drive away the darkness of my mind, Mañjuśrī, I bow down with all my heart! Repeat the mantra twenty-one times. OṂ A RA PA TSA NA DHĪḤ Furthermore, The Praise can accordingly be recited in a ninefold way. Alternatively, you can recite The Praise seven or twenty-one times, after which you should recite the mantra as much as you can. This should suffice for the purpose of daily practice. However, if the goal is to complete a concentrated, in-depth practice to accomplish Mañjuśrī, an ancient commentary on the benefits of the practice explains that one should proceed with the sādhana as described until The Praise has been recited 70,000 times and the mantra has been recited 500,000 to 700,000 times. After reciting The Praise three times, conclude as follows: O loving Sun of Speech, with the luminous rays of your perfect knowledge and compassion, Please utterly dispel from my mind the dark clouds of ignorance and the obscuring emotional and cognitive veils. Help me to correctly understand the excellent words of the buddhas, their commentaries, and their treatises, And having awakened in me lucid and undaunted intelligence, help me to attain omniscience! Pray one-pointedly for such wishes to be fulfilled, and then either dissolve the deity in front into you or consider that the deity is beyond conceptual reference. Then rest for as long as possible in the union of śamatha and vipaśyanā that brings lucid intelligence regarding the selflessness of oneself and phenomena. When you arise from this state, recite: By the merit of having combined the two accumulations and through the power of attaining the clear perception of selflessness, May I directly recognize the supreme wisdom mind of Mañjuśrī, free from elaboration! By dispelling both conceptual and innate ignorance and the afflictive emotions, with vajra-like concentration, May I eradicate cognitive obscurations of every kind and attain the wisdom of the sugatas! Once you have dedicated your merit, made aspiration prayers, and so on, engage in your ordinary activities. Between sessions, give meaning to your actions by not parting from the essence of compassion and its nature as emptiness. Practice with exertion in this way and it is certain that, before long, you will attain the wisdom body of Mañjuśrī, beyond the extremes of existence and cessation. This sādhana was composed by the monk who has listened extensively, Jamyang Khyentse Wangpo, with the intention of benefiting both himself and others, by condensing the essential meaning of all the ancient texts. It was written down by the Dharma master and lama Ānanda Mañjughoṣa. May this be the cause for all beings to master the wisdom of the four kinds of perfect knowledge! 
